Small reformatting changes (#18)
GeoScripting-WUR/Intro2Linux: sufsara_tutorial.Rmd

---
pagetitle: "Getting started with SURFsara cloud"
author: "Dainius Masiliūnas"
date: "`r format(Sys.time(), '%d %B, %Y')`"
output:
  knitrBootstrap::bootstrap_document:
    theme: "simplex"
    highlight: Tomorrow Night Bright
    menu: FALSE
    theme.chooser: TRUE
    highlight.chooser: TRUE
---

<style type="text/css">
body {max-width: none;}
a:visited {color: #91170a;}
</style>

> # Getting started with SURFsara cloud (in-browser)

Reviewer: Now it's called SURF Research Cloud

First go to [https://portal.live.surfresearchcloud.nl/](https://portal.live.surfresearchcloud.nl/) and log in using your WUR account. Use [this link](https://sram.surf.nl/registration?collaboration=4873a9a3-15b8-4e10-9dde-a07262a3bdb6) to request access to the *Wageningen University Geoscripting* collaboration. We (the staff) have to accept access to this collaboration, and create a virtual machine (VM) for your group. In the meantime, you can set up your two factor authentication:

## Two factor authentication (2FA)

Navigate to your [profile page](https://portal.live.surfresearchcloud.nl/profile). Click the **Profile options** button, and then on **Reset Time based password**. You should get the following message: *"Are you sure you want to reset your password?"*. Press **Reset**. Follow the instructions to set up 2FA. You will need the 2FA code later for logging into the VM.

## Accessing the VM

> Once you have been granted access to the *Wageningen University Geoscripting* collaboration *and* you have set up 2FA, you should be able to access your VM. Navigate back to the [starting page](https://portal.live.surfresearchcloud.nl/), and scroll down the page to the 'Workspaces' section. You should see multiple available workspaces (VMs). Please only make use of the workspace with your group name/number. If a workspace with your group name/number does not exist, please contact the staff.

Reviewer: Groups have only names, not numbers.

At the right of every workspace, there should be a (yellow) button that allows access to the workspace. Press that button for the workspace you want to access. A login-page will show up. Enter the following information:

* Use the standard Session type (Xorg)

> * Your username is your SURF researchcloud username, which is not the same as your WUR username (!). You can find your SURF username in your [profile page](https://portal.live.surfresearchcloud.nl/profile)

Reviewer: I guess that should be "Research Cloud"

* Your password is the 2FA code

> If your VM is coming out of 'sleep mode', and you have to fill in a password to unlock it, you should (again) make use of your 2FA code. Happy coding!

Reviewer: We might want to also include some information about how to log off properly (i.e. that all tasks continue running unless you use the log off button, and that you should log off before switching devices because otherwise the previous session will not get resumed: session matching is done by screen resolution)

Author: I've added a small section about this, let me know if it needs to be expanded.

# Optional: accessing the VM from your own machine

> The tutorial above allows you to access the VM in-browser. There are however alternatives to access the VM directly from your own machine, for which we provide a tutorial below.

Reviewer: There should be commas around "however"

## Enrol your SSH key

> Navigate to your [SRAM profile page](https://sram.surf.nl/profile). Generate an SSH key on your own machine. Paste this SSH key into the text box, and click the "Save" button. Please refer to online tutorials to find/create an SSH key for your machine, like [this one](https://www.howtogeek.com/762863/how-to-generate-ssh-keys-in-windows-10-and-windows-11/) for Windows.

Reviewer: The SSH key *generation* is actually also explained in Day 1, it can be easily done using Git GUI too.

Reviewer: Also, maybe good to clarify that this is the *public* SSH key, the private key should never be pasted anywhere (and will not be accepted if you try).

Author: > The SSH key _generation_ is actually also explained in Day 1, it can be easily done using Git GUI too.

That does mean that they need to install Git GUI on their own machine. Note that Git GUI is also already suggested as an alternative option a few lines later.

Author: Surprisingly, it seems like I don't even need an SSH key when using the Remote Desktop app on Windows. I can simply enter the IP address of the VM and I can log in. As a result, it might now even be faster/more convenient to use the desktop app than the in-browser option.

Reviewer: Well, true that you don't technically need to have Git GUI installed to get to the VMs, but given that Git is a central concept in the course and that Git GUI is really easy to generate keys in, it's a good idea anyway. I think it's easier to just have everyone generate keys the same way throughout the course, across all platforms, than try to deal with everyone trying to use their own method of generating keys.

And yes, Remote Desktop does not need an SSH key, it uses the 2FA. You need either one or the other, not both :)

Author: But if the Remote Desktop does not require an SSH key, is it relevant to state how it should be done in this tutorial at all? I've currently commented out this section in the updated version.

Reviewer: Yes, the SSH key is needed for the command line option, which is actually the most efficient.

**Hint**: another easy way to find your SSH key is by running Git GUI on your own machine, though Help → Show SSH Key. 

## Log into the VM

> There are two ways to log into your virtual machine (aside from the in-browser option): through a graphical interface using the *X2Go Client* software, and through a command line using *Git Bash*. To use the graphical interface, install and launch *X2Go Client* on Windows. After launch, the new session *Session Preferences* window will be opened automatically. Fill in the details as follows:

Reviewer: X2go is no longer supported. Instead, you can access the graphical view using the Remote Desktop protocol, either via the "Remote Desktop" app that is built-into Windows, or an RDP client on the other OSs. You simply need to specify the IP address of the VM to connect (and potentially dismiss some warnings about missing certificates).

Author: I've now tested the remote desktop option, and adjusted the tutorial accordingly.

## Logging off from the VM

Note that unless you log off from the VM, all tasks will continue running. You should log off before switching devices, as otherwise the previous session will not get resumed. This is because session matching is done by screen resolution. To log off, press the power button at the top right, and press **Log Out**. Happy coding!

# Optional: accessing the VM from your own machine

The tutorial above allows you to access the VM in-browser. There are, however, alternatives to access the VM directly from your own machine, for which we provide a tutorial below.

<!-- ## Enrol your SSH key -->

<!-- Navigate to your [SRAM profile page](https://sram.surf.nl/profile). Generate an SSH key on your own machine. Paste your *public* SSH key into the text box, and click the "Save" button. You should never paste the *private* key anywhere (it will also not be accepted if you try). -->

<!-- Please refer to online tutorials to find/create an SSH key for your machine, like [this one](https://www.howtogeek.com/762863/how-to-generate-ssh-keys-in-windows-10-and-windows-11/) for Windows. -->

> <!-- **Hint**: another easy way to find your SSH key is by running Git GUI on your own machine, through Help → Show SSH Key.  -->

Reviewer: The reason why there are SSH keys in the first place is to connect using the command line (Bash). This is actually the most efficient way of connecting. This is because `ssh` allows forwarding ports to your own computer and the VMs have server software preinstalled. You can run `ssh -L8787:loclhost:8787 yourusername@yourserver.nl` to forward the port 8787 to your own computer, then in your own browser open http://localhost:8787 and immediately get to RStudio Server. This is very efficient, because then you are only sending commands over the internet, and not pictures, which is so much smaller. You also then don't have issues with repeated keystrokes etc. and you can even use RStudio to upload and download files. But the downside is that you need to run that one extra command and open a new tab in your browser.

Author: I've incorporated this into a new version. This second approach using SSH keys is currently outside of my knowledge and comfort zone, and as a result the text might not be completely accurate. Feel free to elaborate/adjust.

The tutorial above allows you to access the VM in-browser. There are, however, alternatives to access the VM directly from your own machine, for which we provide a tutorial below. There are two main ways to log into your virtual machine (aside from the in-browser option).

## Option 1: Remote Desktop

The first option is via the "Remote Desktop" app that is built-into Windows, or an RDP client on the other operating systems. To connect to the VM using the **Remote Desktop** app ('Extern Bureaublad' if you have Dutch language settings), you simply need to specify the IP address of the VM to connect (and potentially dismiss some warnings about missing certificates). You can find the IP address of your VM by pressing the *down* arrow next to 'State: running' on [this page](https://portal.live.surfresearchcloud.nl/). For the next steps, it is the same as the in-browser option.

## Option 2: Git Bash

The second option is through a command line using *Git Bash* using an SSH key, which is the most efficient way of connecting. This is because `ssh` allows forwarding ports to your own computer and the VMs have server software preinstalled.

> First, you need to enroll your SSH key. Navigate to your [SRAM profile page](https://sram.surf.nl/profile). Generate an SSH key on your own machine. Paste your *public* SSH key into the text box, and click the "Save" button. You should never paste the *private* key anywhere (it will also not be accepted if you try).

Reviewer: "Enrol" has a single l :)

> An easy way to find your SSH key is by running Git GUI on your own machine. For further details, see [tutorial 1](http://geoscripting-wur.github.io/RProjectManagement/).

Reviewer: Find, but also generate

> You can now run `ssh -L8787:localhost:8787 yourusername@yourserver.nl` to forward the port 8787 to your own computer, then in your own browser open http://localhost:8787 and immediately get to RStudio Server. This is very efficient, because then you are only sending commands over the internet, and not pictures, which is so much smaller. You also then don't have issues with repeated keystrokes etc. and you can even use RStudio to upload and download files. The downside is that you need to run that one extra command and open a new tab in your browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now run `ssh -L8787:localhost:8787 yoursurfusername@yoursurfvm.nl` (replace the username and the address with your SURF Research Cloud username and the (IP) address of your VM) to both open a remote connection from your local terminal to the VM to run Bash code, and also to forward the port 8787 from the VM to your own computer. 

Once you are logged into the VM, in your own computer's browser you can open http://localhost:8787 and immediately get to RStudio Server, which is hosted on the VM. You will need to log in to RStudio Server using the 2FA method mentioned above. This option is very efficient, because then you are only sending text commands over the internet, and not pictures, which is so much smaller. You also then don't have issues with repeated keystrokes etc. and you can even use RStudio to upload and download files. The downside is that you need to run that one extra command and open a new tab in your browser.

The same method works for logging into a Jupyter Notebook or Jupyter Lab for working with Python, but they are not installed by default and they use a different port number (by default 8888).
```

![VM running through X2go](figs/x2gorunning.PNG)

> <!-- Likely all deprecated, and possibly also not relevant

Reviewer: Correct, the VMs actually don't even let you shut down (I removed the button for that). There is still a button to restart, but by default it also requires authentication (which is the password of the ubuntu user, which does not have a password set, unless you run `sudo passwd ubuntu` beforehand).

Then on the SURFSara website, select your VM, press the *Power off* button and confirm *Send the power off signal*. Wait for the state to become *OFF*, then press the *Delete* button and confirm deletion.

**Important**: Only if your VM is **deleted** (does **not** show up in the *VMs* tab altogether) does it free the resources for other students to use!

## Saving changes

If you change something, then restart the VM, you may notice that your changes have been lost. This is because by default VM hard drives are not persistent. You need to clone them and set them as persistent to make the changes stick.

To do that, when your VM is in the *OFF* state, press the green floppy disk icon. Give your new template a descriptive name (for example, your name or the name of your group) and choose "Persistent". Wait a while while your changes are saved.

From here on, as long as you start the VM from the template in the *Saved* tab, the changes you do will be saved.

**Important**: Do not make more than one VM persistent, as it might go over the hard disk quota! If you want to start fresh, make sure your previous saved template is deleted first.

## File sharing

> You might want to transfer files to or from the VM. There are two ways to do so. The more convenient method is to use *Network File System* (NFS) to access the VM drive as if it was a local hard drive. To do that, you need to establish a secure connection to the VM and map the network drive to your PC.

Reviewer: It's probably a good idea to say something about file persistence to avoid losing them. There is no link to the M drive on SRC, and so the best way of transferring files (ones that are not already on GitLab, that is) is by using `sftp`, including a graphical client such as WinSCP.

Author: Also here: I've added a small section about this, let me know if it needs to be expanded.
